## Methods

### Data harmonization
For this subchallenge, the training dataset's characteristics were very different compared to those of the test set.
Importantly, training set contains *in vivo* transcription as described in [@doi:10.1126/science.1260403] while test set contains *in vitro* transcription.
Other differences in data collection, synchronization, microarray platforms, preprocessing steps, etc. have been detailed on the [challenge website](https://www.synapse.org/#!Synapse:syn16924919/wiki/590948).
We first impute the missing data points using the KNN imputation method [@isbn:9781439810187] with k = 10 via the [fancyimpute](https://pypi.org/project/fancyimpute/) Python package.
Next, to adjust for batch effects between the two datasets, we apply the *ComBat* algorithm [@doi:10.1093/biostatistics/kxj037] from the *sva* R package [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bts034] on the transcription data.
We assess the effect of the adjustment by examining the principal component analysis (PCA) plots on the raw and processed data. 

### Transcriptional feature selection
Using the STatistical Inference Relief (STIR) algorithm [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bty788], we selected the genes with adjusted STIR P values < 0.05.
Specifically, with the MultiSURF neighborhood, STIR nearest-neighbors to select transcriptional features whose association with an outcome may be due to epistasis.

### Automated machine learning for model training
The Tree-based Pipeline Optimization Tool (TPOT) is a Python Automated Machine Learning (AutoML) tool that uses genetic programming to optimize machine learning pipelines for analyzing biomedical data [@doi:10.1145/2908812.2908918].
However, like other AutoML tools, TPOT currently requires high computational expense when analyzing high dimensional data.
Therefore, even though we already manually select features prior to executing TPOT, we also limit the final classifier of TPOT pipelines to [LinearSVC](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.svm.LinearSVC.html) to focus TPOT's effort on identifying the sequence of preprocessors (e.g., [recursive feature elimination](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.feature_selection.RFE.html) or [function transformer](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/modules/generated/sklearn.preprocessing.FunctionTransformer.html)).
We used balanced accuracy as our scoring function.

### Test sample selection
While there is one single sample per isolate in the training set, there are eight samples for each of the 32 isolates in the test set (most have 2 biological replicates, 2 time points: 6 hours and 24 hours post invasion, perturbed with 5nM DHA (DHA) or perturbed with DMSO (UT)).
Therefore, to obtain one prediction per isolate, we need to take caution in selecting which test samples to predict on.
First, because the training samples are unperturbed, we discard the perturbed samples in the testing set, keeping only the controls (UT).
Second, we analyze the developmental stage of each biological replicate at seperate timepoints.
While the stage of the parasites in the training set was determined by Mok et al. according to [@doi:10.1126/science.1260403], transcriptional profiles in the test set were compared against the 3D7 sample from [@doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0000005].
The Methods section in Mok et al.'s [supplementary material](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5642863/#SMtitle) indicates that the two asexual stage estimation techniques are similar [@doi:10.1074/mcp.M110.006411, @doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.0000005], but we carefully investigate the distributions of parasite stages in two datasets.

### Non-genetic features consideration
Because all samples from the test data were collected from the Thailand-Myanmar border, for now, we ignore the `Country` feature.
In the future, however, perhaps we can place more weights on the training samples that are geographically closer to this region.
We also ignore the `Kmeans.Grp` feature that is cluster groups corresponding to three types of transcription profile based on parasite developmental stage.

### Availability
Detailed preprocessing, modeling and analysis code for this study is available at [https://github.com/EpistasisLab/malaria-challenge](https://github.com/EpistasisLab/malaria-challenge).

